# Guidelines for Use of Unchecked Conversions of Security Contract Types

**Audience note:** This document is for developers who think they need to use
unchecked conversions, and for security engineers who are reviewing new uses of
such conversions.


## Overview

Security contract types, such as `SafeHtml`, let us secure APIs against common
vulnerabilities such as [XSS](https://www.google.com/about/appsecurity/learning/xss/) and
[SQL injection](https://www.owasp.org/index.php/SQL_Injection). When used correctly, they help Google's
security team make sure our applications work on behalf of our users, or at
worst, fail safe; but misuse makes it next to impossible for reviewers to check
program safety.

The APIs and their related security contract types are designed such that in a
typical application, the vast majority of instances of such types can be created
using inherently safe APIs (uses of which do not need to be manually security
reviewed). For example, [F1][F1] uses a SQL Builder interface
to create SQL queries
that are guaranteed to not be subject to SQL injection vulnerabilities.
Similarly, [safe HTML types](safehtml-types.md) come with various inherently
safe builders and factory methods.

There are however scenarios that cannot be expressed using inherently safe APIs,
such as available builders of security contract types. To accommodate such use
cases, the inherently safe API is accompanied by an API that consumes an
arbitrary string without any validation; typically this is embodied as a factory
method that performs an *unchecked conversion* from an arbitrary plain string to
an instance of the desired security contract type.

Obviously, such unchecked conversions must only be used if it can be established
through careful security code review that for all possible program states, the
value supplied to the conversion does in fact satisfy the type contract, or it
is otherwise known from context that this use cannot result in security
vulnerabilities.

The primary goal of our efforts to create inherently safe APIs is to reduce the
amount of code that could potentially harbor security bugs and hence needs
manual security review. It also allows us to perform reviews of code that does
need manual review with a high degree of confidence. With that in mind:

*   **Unchecked conversions should be used rarely, and only if strictly
    necessary; that is, if inherently safe APIs cannot be used.**
*   **Use of unchecked conversions should be structured such that it is readily
    apparent to a security reviewer that the use is indeed safe, and such that
    it is unlikely that future code modifications result in later introduction
    of security bugs.**

The remainder of this document presents guidelines for appropriate use of
unchecked conversions, along with specific examples.

## Guidelines

Generally, we BUILD visibility-restrict access to unchecked conversion APIs, and
require review and approval before new call sites are allowlisted. This review
ensures adherence to these guidelines, and establishes correctness from a
security perspective.

### Use unchecked conversions only if strictly necessary

To make manual review tractable, the number of call sites of unchecked
conversions (each of which needs manual code review) must be kept as low as
possible. Therefore, unchecked conversions must not be used if the use case can
be expressed in terms of an available inherently safe API.

### Use unchecked conversions only within inherently safe APIs

Unchecked conversions should be used only within self-contained, special-purpose
libraries or packages that themselves expose an inherently safe API:

*   It must be possible to ascertain that an unchecked conversion used in such a
    library/package is guaranteed to produce type-contract-compliant values
    solely based on inspection of the library (and in some cases code the
    library depends on). The safety of such unchecked conversions **must not**
    hinge on code that depends on the library (i.e., the library's clients'
    code). This guideline allows for one-time review of the code surrounding the
    unchecked conversion, and avoids the need for (unscalable and difficult to
    track/ensure) manual code review of all callers of the library.

*   Unchecked conversions must only be used in libraries/packages dedicated to a
    specific purpose. In particular, they must not be used throughout
    application code. This guideline ensures that uses of unchecked conversions
    are limited as much as possible. In our codebase, unchecked conversions are
    generally provided by separate, BUILD visibility-restricted targets. The
    targets allowlist is intended to be kept as narrow as possible to discourage
    introduction of inappropriate uses of unchecked conversions.

*   Unchecked conversions may also be used in code that is generated by a
    security-reviewed code generator designed to only generate code that upholds
    type contracts. Generated code should use a special-purpose conversion
    function separate from unchecked conversions intended to be used in
    hand-written code.

### Unchecked conversions in legacy code and code under refactoring

During ongoing refactorings to adopt use of security contract types in an
existing codebase, it is often convenient or necessary to use unchecked
conversions. Special purpose "legacy conversions" typically exist for this
purpose; e.g. [`c.g.common.html.types.LegacyConversions`][JavaLegacyConversions]
and [`goog.html.legacyconversions`][JsLegacyConversions]. These are used to
distinguish conversions which are guaranteed to produce contract-compliant
instances of a security contract type - regular unchecked conversions which
follow this document's guidelines - from those which don't. Legacy conversions
mark code which still poses security risk.

For example, if a web frontend's HTML rendering is converted to the use of a
[strict autoescaping template system](https://developers.google.com/closure/templates/docs/security), code that
supplies HTML markup to the template system must be changed to provide it in the
form of a security contract type, such as `c.g.common.html.types.SafeHtml` for
jslayout, or `SanitizedContent` for Closure Templates.

Users outside Hardening are heavily discouraged from introducing any new legacy
conversion, outside of specialized cases such as:

*   Migration of existing code to a new language, such as
    JavaScript-to-TypeScript.
*   LSC refactorings that introduce a requirement for safehtml in existing APIs.
*   Eliminating a legacy conversion in a library, by pushing it down to its
    users.
*   Eliminating a legacy conversion in a client library, by pushing it up to the
    server code.

Other cases may be the result of copying another part of the codebase, and must
be replaced either by a safe API or, if necessary, an unchecked conversion.

### In tests, use a test-only conversion

Unchecked conversions may be used in tests where necessary or convenient (since
this cannot result in vulnerabilities in production code). However, to
distinguish test and non-test use, we typically provide a for-test-only
unchecked conversion in a [`testonly=1`](https://bazel.build/reference/be/common-definitions#common.testonly) target,
e.g.,
[`c.g.c.html.types.testing.HtmlConversions.newSafeHtmlForTest`][HtmlConversions.newSafeHtmlForTest]
and
[`goog.html.testing.newSafeHtmlForTest`][goog.html.testing.newSafeHtmlForTest].

Note that even `testonly` unchecked conversions should only be used if an
inherently safe API is not convenient. This is because they can generate values
that non-test APIs would not, and introduce skews between tests and production.

[F1]: http://research.google.com/pubs/pub38125.html
[JsLegacyConversions]: https://github.com/google/closure-library/blob/master/closure/goog/html/legacyconversions.js

[JavaLegacyConversions]: https://static.javadoc.io/com.google.common.html.types/types/0.0/com/google/common/html/types/LegacyConversions.html
[HtmlConversions.newSafeHtmlForTest]: https://static.javadoc.io/com.google.common.html.types/types/0.0/com/google/common/html/types/testing/HtmlConversions.html#newSafeHtmlForTest
[SafeHtml]: http://static.javadoc.io/com.google.gwt/gwt-user/2.7.0/com/google/gwt/safehtml/shared/SafeHtml.html
[SafeHtmlUtils.fromSafeConstant]: http://static.javadoc.io/com.google.gwt/gwt-user/2.7.0/com/google/gwt/safehtml/shared/SafeHtmlUtils.html#fromSafeConstant%28java.lang.String%29
[goog.html.testing.newSafeHtmlForTest]: https://github.com/google/closure-library/blob/c271d80cc69c926994f42c275ff7b9169c4c459a/closure/goog/html/testing.js#L38
